Paper: Advancing High Energy Physics Data Analysis with Julia: A Case for JuliaHEP (#1084)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/ianna_osborne/main.md

---
title: Advancing High Energy Physics Data Analysis with Julia -- A Case for JuliaHEP
abstract: |
  High-energy physics (HEP) research relies on efficient data analysis 
  frameworks to process vast amounts of structured and unstructured data. 
  Traditionally, Python has been the dominant language for data analysis 
  in HEP, supported by libraries such as NumPy, Awkward Array, and Uproot. 
  However, the Julia programming language offers a compelling alternative 

>   with its high-performance capabilities and ease of use. This paper introduces 

Reviewer: Specifically, how so over Python? Some key deltas should be highlighted, even at the abstract stage.

  JuliaHEP, an initiative to leverage Julia for HEP data analysis, providing 
  a high-level overview of its benefits, current developments, and integration 
  with existing Python-based tools.

---

## Introduction

The high-energy physics (HEP) community has long relied on Python and C++ for data analysis and simulation. While Python provides ease of use and a rich scientific ecosystem, it struggles with performance for large-scale analyses. C++, on the other hand, offers speed but comes with increased complexity and slower development cycles. Julia, a modern language designed for scientific computing, promises the best of both worlds: high-level expressiveness with near-native execution speed.

> In this paper, we introduce JuliaHEP, an emerging set of tools and libraries designed to facilitate HEP data analysis in Julia. We discuss how JuliaHEP integrates with Python-based frameworks such as Awkward Array, Uproot, and Numba while also leveraging Julia’s strengths, such as just-in-time (JIT) compilation, multiple dispatch, and seamless GPU acceleration.

Reviewer: Should be noted here Numba / Jax / triton is also JIT and supports GPU programming, though admittedly it's not "native" Python

---

## Introduction

The High-Energy Physics (HEP) community has long relied on Python and C++ for data analysis. While Python provides ease of use and a rich scientific ecosystem, it struggles with performance for large-scale analyses. C++, on the other hand, offers speed but comes with increased complexity and slower development cycles. Julia, a modern language designed for scientific computing, promises the best of both worlds: high-level expressiveness with near-native execution speed.

:::{figure} heplanguages.png
:label: fig:heplanguages
HEP Software: it all revolves around a language, or several.
:::

JuliaHEP, with its emerging set of tools and libraries [@juliahep], aims to facilitate HEP data analysis in Julia. However, given the long timescales of HEP experiments and the substantial legacy software they depend on, introducing Julia alongside existing C++ and Python ecosystems inevitably creates a three-language problem — though this is intended as a transitional, rather than permanent, arrangement.

> To navigate this, three main development strategies have emerged within the JuliaHEP community. The first involves wrapping mature C++ libraries — for example, Geant4.jl provides a Julia interface to the widely used Geant4 particle transportation toolkit. The second approach opts for a complete reimplementation of existing tools in native Julia, as demonstrated by BAT.jl. The third, and the one we follow, focuses on integrating Julia with the Python-based Awkward Array library via its dedicated Julia backend, AwkwardArray.jl.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we want to mention ROOT.jl for "wrapping" and "UnROOT.jl" for re-write approach in this article to make it more close to where Awkward Array is relevant

Author: @Moelf - please, see suggestion. Thanks!

> To navigate this, three main development strategies have emerged within the JuliaHEP community. The first involves wrapping mature C++ libraries — for example, Geant4.jl provides a Julia interface to the widely used Geant4 particle transportation toolkit. The second approach opts for a complete reimplementation of existing tools in native Julia, as demonstrated by BAT.jl. The third, and the one we follow, focuses on integrating Julia with the Python-based Awkward Array library via its dedicated Julia backend, AwkwardArray.jl.

Author: ```suggestion
To navigate this, three main development strategies have emerged within the JuliaHEP community. The first involves wrapping mature C++ libraries to make them accessible from Julia — for example, Geant4.jl provides a Julia interface to the widely used Geant4 particle transportation toolkit, and ROOT.jl offers bindings to the ROOT data analysis framework. The second approach opts for complete reimplementations of existing tools in native Julia, as demonstrated by BAT.jl for Bayesian analysis and UnROOT.jl for reading ROOT files without relying on the C++ libraries. The third strategy, and the one we follow here, focuses on integrating Julia with the Python-based Awkward Array library via its dedicated Julia backend, AwkwardArray.jl, enabling efficient access to nested, irregular data structures commonly used in HEP.
```

> To navigate this, three main development strategies have emerged within the JuliaHEP community. The first involves wrapping mature C++ libraries to make them accessible from Julia — for example, Geant4.jl provides a Julia interface to the widely used Geant4 particle transportation toolkit, and ROOT.jl offers bindings to the ROOT data analysis framework. The second approach opts for complete reimplementations of existing tools in native Julia, as demonstrated by BAT.jl for Bayesian analysis and UnROOT.jl for reading ROOT files without relying on the C++ libraries. The third strategy, and the one we follow here, focuses on integrating Julia with the Python-based Awkward Array library via its dedicated Julia backend, AwkwardArray.jl, enabling efficient access to nested, irregular data structures commonly used in HEP.

Reviewer 3: The first two strategies are described by introducing the strategy, then giving a few examples of usage. However, the third strategy is not described, and is only introduced by example. I would word the final strategy something like this: 

The third strategy focuses on integrating Julia with Python; we are following this strategy to expose the Python-based Awkward Array library via its dedicated Julia backend, AwkwardArray.jl, enabling efficient access to nested, irregular data structures commonly used in HEP.

To bridge the Python and Julia ecosystems, we make extensive use of PythonCall.jl[@PythonCall.jl], a package that provides bi-directional interoperability between the two languages. This enables us to offload computationally heavy operations to Julia — following a pattern familiar from other JIT compilation tools in Python, such as Numba.

We evaluated this integration by comparing performance and usability using Julia-native types like Vector of Vectors, which provide similar capabilities for representing nested, irregular data. Our results show no significant overhead when combining the two ecosystems. Additionally, we explored Julia’s interoperability and native packages to further optimize HEP computations, offering a practical pathway for gradually introducing Julia to the Python-based HEP community.

## Performance Benefits

We present the benefits of using Julia for HEP workloads by benchmarking the same operation with JuliaHEP tools and comparing the results to Python and C++ implementations. As shown in @fig:combinations, Julia offers a noticeable speedup with less boilerplate.

:::{figure} combinations.png
:label: fig:combinations

> This is the combinations performance plot, comparing the ak.combinations function with a Julia kernel on an awkward array. The Julia kernel uses JuliaMath/Combinatirics.jl[@Combinatorics.jl].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the combinations performance plot, comparing the ak.combinations function with a Julia kernel on an awkward array. The Julia kernel uses JuliaMath/Combinatorics.jl[@Combinatorics.jl].
```

?

:::

>  This is without exploiting Julia’s potential for parallel computing and built-in GPU support, which provides a pathway for scaling HEP computations.

Reviewer: what would an example workflow of this look like? Would one load the data with AwkwardArray.jl, and write julia-native GPU kernels to operate on them?

Author: For instance, in collider event reconstruction, you might want to compute all pairwise ΔR distances between particles across a large dataset. This kind of nested, irregular computation is well suited to Julia’s GPU or SIMD capabilities, especially when the data lives in variable-length jagged arrays — something that AwkwardArray.jl handles cleanly.

Rather than rewriting the full pipeline in Julia, one could keep data loading and I/O in Python, and target Julia only where performance bottlenecks exist, using it as a high-performance co-processor.

>  This is without exploiting Julia’s potential for parallel computing and built-in GPU support, which provides a pathway for scaling HEP computations.

Author: ```suggestion
This is without yet exploiting Julia’s potential for parallel computing and GPU support, which opens the door to workflows where data loaded with AwkwardArray.jl is processed using Julia-native GPU kernels or multi-threaded code — offering scalable performance without disrupting existing pipelines.
```

## Scaling it up

> While performance gains matter, integrating Julia into established HEP workflows also involves practical challenges. AwkwardArray.jl enables physicists to explore Julia’s capabilities alongside existing Python tools without disrupting current workflows. It acts as a transitional layer, allowing heavy computations to be offloaded to Julia when useful, while preserving compatibility with Python’s data analysis ecosystem.

Author: ```suggestion
While performance gains matter, integrating Julia into established HEP workflows also involves practical challenges. AwkwardArray.jl enables physicists to explore Julia’s capabilities alongside existing Python tools by accessing shared data buffers directly, without copying. This allows heavy computations to be offloaded to Julia where appropriate, while maintaining full compatibility with Python’s data ecosystem.
```

> Naturally, adding a third language raises a long-term question. Will Julia replace Python and C++? It’s too soon to say. Legacy software must be maintained, Python remains dominant, and new options like Rust are emerging. For now, the goal is to provide a flexible, incremental path for physicists to use Julia where it offers clear advantages.

Reviewer: I don't really get the point of this paragraph. Why would this suggest Julia being a "replacement" of Python and C++ at all, if it is here being used as a wrapper for the Python-native AwkwardArray (which itself is a wrapper of C++ routines)?

Author: Thanks — the confusion is understandable, because the paragraph currently implies Julia is just piggybacking on Python or C++ code (like a wrapper), which would make “replacement” talk seem overblown.

But that’s not what AwkwardArray.jl is doing — it exposes the same data buffers used in Python’s AwkwardArray, allowing zero-copy interoperability. Julia can operate directly on the data, leveraging its own performance and language features independently of Python, even if the data originated there.

So the point of the paragraph isn’t that Julia is replacing Python or C++ now. It’s that enabling Julia to work directly on shared data buffers (without reimplementation or duplication) gives physicists a realistic path to start using Julia for heavy computation — incrementally, and without breaking their existing ecosystem. This naturally leads to long-term questions: “Could more shift to Julia over time?” That’s what the paragraph is addressing.

> Naturally, adding a third language raises a long-term question. Will Julia replace Python and C++? It’s too soon to say. Legacy software must be maintained, Python remains dominant, and new options like Rust are emerging. For now, the goal is to provide a flexible, incremental path for physicists to use Julia where it offers clear advantages.

Author: ```suggestion
Naturally, introducing a third language raises long-term questions. Could Julia eventually take on a larger role, perhaps replacing parts of the Python or C++ stack? It’s too early to tell. Legacy software must be maintained, Python remains dominant, and new contenders like Rust are emerging. For now, the focus is on enabling a flexible, incremental path to using Julia where it offers clear advantages — without disrupting current workflows.
```

The main technical hurdle is efficient data interoperability — a challenge addressed by the Awkward Array design, which uses contiguous data buffers and descriptive metadata. This model has also proven effective in related optimizations, such as its virtual array implementation.

> Data access remains central. ROOT TTrees are still the dominant format, with RNTuple expected to grow in use. Both formats are accessible as Awkward Arrays via uproot (Python) and unroot (Julia), ensuring consistency across languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data access remains central. ROOT TTrees are still the dominant format, with RNTuple expected to grow in use. Both formats are accessible as Awkward Arrays via uproot (Python) and UnROOT.jl (Julia), ensuring consistency across languages.
```

> Naturally, introducing a third language raises long-term questions. Could Julia eventually take on a larger role, perhaps replacing parts of the Python or C++ stack? It’s too early to tell. Legacy software must be maintained, Python remains dominant, and new contenders like Rust are emerging. For now, the focus is on enabling a flexible, incremental path to using Julia where it offers clear advantages — without disrupting current workflows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Naturally, introducing a third language raises long-term questions. Could Julia eventually take on a larger role, perhaps replacing parts of the Python or C++ stack? It remains too early to tell. Legacy software must be maintained, Python remains dominant, and new contenders like Rust are emerging. For now, the focus is on enabling a flexible, incremental path to using Julia where it offers clear advantages — without disrupting current workflows.
```

> Managing a shared Python–Julia environment remains challenging. Conda for Python, juliaup, and Julia’s package manager integrate well, though keeping package versions aligned requires care. A coordination tool like pixi is currently under evaluation to simplify this.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure how pixi will solve this? If Julia and its packages are available as a conda package, that would solve it, but that also solves it for classic conda. If not, I'm not sure how managing conda packages solves it, unless pixi can also integrate with the Julia package manager (like how it can with uv)? Just a question, doesn't need to be addressed here unless there's a good way to clarify it in a sentence or two.

Reviewer 2: I think the main challenge is getting a specific version of Julia itself, if you can do that, then presumably:
- pixi + pixi.toml -> Python environment
- julia + JuliaProject.toml -> Julia environment

I assume it's okay to have one more toml file tracked...

Author: We have discussed it with Wolf, they are looking into it.

Reviewer 4: @ianna can you confirm if this is resolved?

Reviewer 4: @ianna - please confirm and make edits before the author deadline this Friday.

Author: Thanks @ameyxd . I think it is resolved.
